KEP-3488: Add information on expression composition (#3669)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/3488-cel-admission-control/README.md

#### CEL Expression Composition

##### Use Cases

###### Reusing/memoizing an expensive computation

For a CEL expression that runs in O(n^2) time or worse (or otherwise
takes a significant amount of time to execute), it would be nice to only run

> it when necessary. For instance, if multiple validation expressions used the

Reviewer: Lead with the multiple validation expression case since that is the case that matter? (Strictly speaking, it would be possible to do this optimization today since CEL is purely functional. I.e. the results of identical sub-expressions could be memorized today in single CEL expressions).

Author: Right, I've re-ordered the use cases section.

same expensive subexpression, that subexpression could be refactored out.

###### Code re-use for complicated subexpressions

An subexpression may not be computationally expensive, but could still be

> intricate enough that copy-pasting it would be considered a code smell.

Reviewer: I consider this the primary motivation for this feature.

Spell out what is wrong with copy-pasting here? Redundancy? Higher maintenance cost? Potential for code drift?

Author: Right, I've re-ordered the use case section and made the part re: copy-pasting a bit more clear.

  validations:
    - expression: "variables.itemMetadataNames.all(name, name.startsWith('xyz-'))"
    - expression: "variables.itemMetadataNames.exists(name, name == 'required')"
```

Variable names must be valid CEL names. What constitutes a
valid CEL name can be found at CEL's [language definition](https://github.com/google/cel-spec/blob/master/doc/langdef.md#syntax) under `IDENT`.
This validity is checked at write time.

For runtime cost limit purposes, variables count towards the runtime cost limit
once per policy. The cost of each variable is computed when it is first evaluated in an
expression, mirroring how the cost limit would be calculated if the variable's
expression was embedded verbatim.  If the runtime cost limit is exceeded in the
process, then evaluation halts. Whether or not the request actually fails
depends on the failure policy, however. For subsequent uses, inclusion of the
variable has zero effect on the runtime cost limit. If the variable evaluates
to an array or some other iterable, and some expression iterates on it, that
of course contributes to the cost limit, but simply including the variable does
not add the underlying expression's cost again.

> If a variable evaluates to a CEL type at compile-time, then that information will be

Reviewer 2: I am not sure type deduction works for CEL. If possible I would vote for the "declared type" solution

Author: Would `cel.Env.Check` not work in this scenario? If the type check passes cleanly then I'd think that'd be all the type information we'd need.

Reviewer: type deduction only works for expressions that pass type checking. We don't require that expressions (or variables) successfully pass type checking, so we will have variables that do not have a known type.  Declaring the type is an interesting option. I doubt we would be able to figure out how to do that easily. CEL does not offer type declarations as part of the grammar, so we would probably need to use OpenAPIv3, which means that in some cases we would be copying large chuncks OpenAPIv3 from native types or CRDs into the variable declarations. That will have quite a few problems (how to keep the chunks in sync?). Falling back to `Dyn` is the other alternative.

#### CEL Expression Composition

##### Use Cases

###### Code re-use for complicated expressions

A CEL expression may not be computationally expensive, but could still be

> intricate enough that copy-pasting could prove to be a bad decision later on

Reviewer 3: Worth mentioning especially after formatted message in place, we would expect more copy-pasting?

it was copy-pasted. A variable, on the other hand, will only need to be updated
in one place.

###### Reusing/memoizing an expensive computation

For a CEL expression that runs in O(n^2) time or worse (or otherwise
takes a significant amount of time to execute), it would be nice to only run
it when necessary. For instance, if multiple validation expressions used the
same expensive expression, that expression could be refactored out into a
variable.

##### Variables

Each CEL "program" is a single expression. There is no support for variable
assignment. This can result in redundant code to traverse maps/arrays or
dereference particular fields.

We can support this in much the same way as cel-policy-template `terms`. These
can be lazily evaluated while the validation expressions are evaluated
(cel-policy-template does this).

A policy can include an additional `variables` section. This is an array
containing one or more `name` and `expression` pairs, which can be used/re-used by
the policy's validation expressions. These results are memoized on a
per-validation basis, so if multiple expressions use the same spec variables,

> the expression that calculates the variable's value will only be ran once.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the expression that calculates the variable's value will only run once.
```

The variables can be accessed as members of `variables`, which is an object
that is exposed to CEL expressions (both validation expressions as well as
other variables).

For example:

```yaml
  variables:
    - name: metadataList
      expression: "spec.list.map(x, x.metadata)"
    - name: itemMetadataNames
      expression: "variables.metadataList.map(m, m.name)"
  validations:
    - expression: "variables.itemMetadataNames.all(name, name.startsWith('xyz-'))"
    - expression: "variables.itemMetadataNames.exists(name, name == 'required')"
```

> Variable names must be valid CEL names. What constitutes a

Reviewer 3: Note: May need API Validation on this one.

Reviewer 3: Not a merging blocker. Will check in implementation.

valid CEL name can be found at CEL's [language definition](https://github.com/google/cel-spec/blob/master/doc/langdef.md#syntax) under `IDENT`.

> This validity is checked at write time.

Reviewer 3: Checked together with other API validations? (while CRD create/update?)

Reviewer 3: Not a merging blocker.

once per policy. The cost of each variable is computed when it is first evaluated in an
expression, mirroring how the cost limit would be calculated if the variable's
expression was embedded verbatim.  If the runtime cost limit is exceeded in the
process, then evaluation halts. No individual variable or expression will be listed as the
cause in the resulting message. Whether or not the request actually fails depends on the failure policy,
however. For subsequent uses, inclusion of the variable has zero effect on the runtime
cost limit. If the variable evaluates to an array or some other iterable, and some expression
iterates on it, that of course contributes to the cost limit, but simply including the variable does
not add the underlying expression's cost again.

Variables are also subject to the per-expression runtime cost limit. Exceeding the per-expression
runtime cost limit is always attributed to the variable, unlike the per-policy limit.

If a variable evaluates to a CEL type at compile-time, then that information will be
used for any type-checking done on expressions where the variable is used.

> 

Reviewer 3: Suggest to remove any info regarding with informational type checking. We will add additional info if needed later for informational type checking

Reviewer 2: +1 Let's leave them as dyn for now.

We can support this in much the same way as cel-policy-template `terms`. These
can be lazily evaluated while the validation expressions are evaluated
(cel-policy-template does this).

A policy can include an additional `variables` section. This is an array
containing one or more `name` and `expression` pairs, which can be used/re-used by
the policy's validation expressions. These results are memoized on a
per-validation basis, so if multiple expressions use the same spec variables,
the expression that calculates the variable's value will only be ran once.

The variables can be accessed as members of `variables`, which is an object
that is exposed to CEL expressions (both validation expressions as well as
other variables).

For example:

```yaml
  variables:
    - name: metadataList
      expression: "spec.list.map(x, x.metadata)"
    - name: itemMetadataNames
      expression: "variables.metadataList.map(m, m.name)"
  validations:
    - expression: "variables.itemMetadataNames.all(name, name.startsWith('xyz-'))"
    - expression: "variables.itemMetadataNames.exists(name, name == 'required')"
```

Variable names must be valid CEL names, and not already used by Kubernetes

> in some way (i.e, `request` is not considered valid). What constitutes a

Reviewer: `request` is OK now that the variable names are exposed in CEL as fields of the `variables` CEL variable.

valid CEL name can be found at CEL's [language definition](https://github.com/google/cel-spec/blob/master/doc/langdef.md#syntax) under `IDENT`.

> This validity is checked at creation time.

Reviewer: nit: it will be checked by API validation, so will apply to all writes to the API object, not just creates

For runtime cost limit purposes, variables count towards the runtime cost limit

> once. The cost of each variable is computed when it is first evaluated in an

Reviewer: Once per ValidatingAdmissionPolicy or once per validation expression?

Author: Once per policy - I think this is relatively straightforward to reason about, and should allow for some more expensive operations that might otherwise not be allowed.

Reviewer: SG Just capture that in the KEP and I think this is resolved.

expression, mirroring how the cost limit would be calculated if the variable's
expression was embedded verbatim.  If the runtime cost limit is exceeded in the

> process, then evaluation halts. Whether or not the request actually fails

Reviewer: When the cost limit is hit, how will it be attributed? Imagine there is a variable with a high cost and multiple validation rules all with near zero costs, will the cost limit error make it clear that the variable is responsible for the limit being hit?  I'm curious about this both for the per-policy limit and per-expression limit.

cc @cici37

Reviewer 2: Feels like a strange situation where a policy has to be "primed" a few times before it starts working. If there are N high-cost variables, and each execution has budget for only one variable, then the policy may need N execution to warm up.

Author: > When the cost limit is hit, how will it be attributed? Imagine there is a variable with a high cost and multiple validation rules all with near zero costs, will the cost limit error make it clear that the variable is responsible for the limit being hit? I'm curious about this both for the per-policy limit and per-expression limit.

I think that noting execution failed during variable evaluation is good. Maybe if we track how much time we spend during variable evaluation vs. validation rule evaluation we could provide a cost breakdown in the error message - x% time spent in variable vs. y% time spent with rule?

> Feels like a strange situation where a policy has to be "primed" a few times before it starts working. If there are N high-cost variables, and each execution has budget for only one variable, then the policy may need N execution to warm up.

I'm not sure that'd work, since expressions are only memoized on a per-validation basis, so subsequent executions would be starting from scratch.

Reviewer 2: I missed the "per-validation" part.

Reviewer 2: (resolved)

Reviewer: My $.02:

- I think any per-expression runtime limit should apply to each variable expression. If the expression hits the limit when being evaluated (regardless of the fact that it is being lazy-evaluated to satisfy some other variable or expression), the runtime limit error should be attributed to that variable. For expressions and variables that depend on other variables, we should not include the runtime costs of evaluating the dependents.
- The per-policy limit should probably be phrased to not assign blame to a particular variable or expression unless we can summarize ALL costs, which I'm not convinced is worth the investment (we don't do that today in CRD validation do we?)

Author: > I think any per-expression runtime limit should apply to each variable expression. If the expression hits the limit when being evaluated (regardless of the fact that it is being lazy-evaluated to satisfy some other variable or expression), the runtime limit error should be attributed to that variable. For expressions and variables that depend on other variables, we should not include the runtime costs of evaluating the dependents.

Gotcha, I'll make it clear that the per-expression limit still applies to variables, and that the original expression will be listed as the cause for per-policy failures.

> The per-policy limit should probably be phrased to not assign blame to a particular variable or expression unless we can summarize ALL costs, which I'm not convinced is worth the investment (we don't do that today in CRD validation do we?)

Right, we don't do this with CRDs, so we can keep things consistent and not do it here either.

depends on the failure policy, however. For subsequent uses, inclusion of the
variable has zero effect on the runtime cost limit. If the variable evaluates
to an array or some other iterable, and some expression iterates on it, that
of course contributes to the cost limit, but simply including the variable does
not add the underlying expression's cost again.

Variables must evaluate at compile time to a CEL type that is not the base
`ref.Val`. This also means that unlike policy expressions, variables have

> compile-time type checking performed on them (since types are all known).

Reviewer: Are the types well known? If the types are the same as for expressions, we have the same problems that prevent us from performing static type checking.  Maybe this should be rephrased to clarify that _if_ the variable passes type checking that the type will be tracked such that type checking on expressions can leverage it according to whatever level of type checking is performed on expressions (via @jiahuif's proposal).

Reviewer 2: Do we have a way to specify a type for a variable? Some way to "declare" a variable with type. Like
```
variables:
  - name: Foo
    type: {group: "apps", version: "v1", kind: "Deployment"} 
```

Reviewer 2: Or do we want the type to be dynamic and implement automatic type deduction?

Author: I like the idea of declaring a type for variables, which would also allow us to error out early (before a validation expression continues evaluation) if a variable doesn't evaluate to its declared type. I think we need to also have a way to declare built-in CEL types in addition to GVKs, which could just be a string - `double`, `int`, `string`, etc:

```
variables:
  - name: builtinType
    type: string
```

Reviewer 2: The convention would be use two type fields but requires that only of them exists. For example, either
```
variables:
  - name: Foo
    resourceType: {group: "apps", version: "v1", kind: "Deployment"} 
```
OR
```
variables:
  - name: Foo
    builtinType: string
```
We cannot overload a field to be an "union" type though.

Author: If we're making types optional for variables, do we want to still have the type declaration field?

Author: (marking this resolved with the addition of `resourceType` and `builtinType`)

> A compile-time type check failure prevents the policy from being created,

Reviewer 2: Unfortunately we the type check has to stay optional/informative. Short version is that the referred type may not exist when the policy is created.

Reviewer 2: I would suggest remove this behavior for now.

Author: Right, I'll make type-checking informational and mark this as resolved when I do so.

regardless of failure policy.

Variables can reference other variables, but circular references
are not allowed. Variables can also only reference other variables that

> have been previously defined in the `variables` section.

Reviewer: nit: Invert this paragraph? E.g. "Because variables may only reference variables defined earlier in the variables list, circular references are not possible"?

> If an error ocurrs during variable evaluation, then the expression

Reviewer 2: Does this mean errors are never cached? For a malformed expression it may evaluate it over and over again.

Author: Isn't it possible that an expression fails for some inputs and not others, and those inputs could change from one evaluation to the other? I think we could cache if inputs are a factor in cache invalidation, but I'm not sure if we get something out of that considering how fast expression evaluation is intended to be.

Reviewer 2: Sorry for the confusion. Since the variables are not cached between evaluations, I think the problem above would not apply because an error of variable evaluation will fast fail the whole validation.

Reviewer 2: (resolved)

>     - expression: "itemMetadataNames.exists(name, name == 'required')"

Reviewer: This example was added to make the basic idea clear, but we should think more about the details and improve it as necessary.

For example, using root CEL variables has a _significant_ impact on our ability to add root variables in the future. If a user names a variable `permissions` and we later add a `permissions` root variable, the variable names would collide. Alternative to consider: All user variables are fields of a `vars` (exact name TBD) variable in CEL to add scoping.

Author: Scoping is a concern, I agree. We could keep everything under something called:

* `celVars`
*  `composedExprs`
*  `k8s.vars`

I sort of like the idea of a root Kubernetes object.

Reviewer: Maybe use the same identifier as the field name used in the resource to declare the variables? I.e. `variables`. That's basically what we do for params.

Author: (marking this as resolved, implemented the `variables` suggestion)

```

Since the variable names must be valid CEL names, this is checked at creation

> time.

Reviewer: More detail here?  I would expect:
- Valid CEL variable name according to CEL grammar (regex + keyword collision check)
- Not a reserved Kubernetes variable name (object, oldObject, request, ...)

Author: Fixed, I've made this a bit more clear + linked to the CEL language definition.

For resource constraint purposes, lazily-evaluated variables
count towards the overall policy limit, but only once, to account for

> memoization.

Reviewer: Specify that this is runtime cost?  (CEL admission does not have estimated cost)

What does only once mean? Does it mean that the runtime cost of a variable is computed when it is first evaluated and then added to the runtime cost of all expressions when evaluated? When exactly during evaluation does this cost get tallied?  This impacts when evaluation gets canceled due to the runtime cost limit being exceeded.

Please put answer in KEP.

Author: Gotcha, I've made things a bit more clear (explicitly referring to runtime cost, for instance). I think I mentioned to you offline the other day about making variables count towards the runtime cost limit every time they're referenced, though I decided against it since I think 1) while a bit more difficult, it's still simple enough for users to reason about runtime cost 2) I think it will help in cases where expensive computations are left to a variable.

> Informational type checking also applies to subexpressions.

Reviewer: Please summarize how this will work. It's not obvious to me when seeing this comment.

Author: I've reworked this section a bit, adding a requirement that variables evaluate to some concrete type.

> Informational type checking also applies to subexpressions.

Reviewer: Are we calling these "variables" or "subexpressions"?  This KEP update uses both terms but would be easier to read if we picked a single term and stuck with it.

FWIW, I prefer "variables".

Subexpressions can reference other subexpressions, but circular references
are not allowed. It is possible in theory to have two subexpressions that
refer to each other that will never run at the same time, for instance:

```
#subExpr1
someBool? "A" : subExpr2

#subExpr2
!someBool? subExpr1 : "B"
```

In practice, it is not clear what this would add, however. It could also
lead to cases where a certain set of inputs causes a circular reference.

> So, it is safer to simply not allow circular references at all.

Reviewer: Please decide.

FWIW, I'm in favor of variables being ordered and only being able to refer to other variables earlier in the list.

Reviewer: Also, the decision here impacts how the variables need to be structured? Right now the example shows the variables defined as an ordered list, but if order does not matter I would have expected a map.

Author: I'll re-word the KEP to make it more clear I'm not in favor of circular references.

As long as there are no circular references I think an ordered list makes sense as well - I'll make that more clear as well.

If an error ocurrs during subexpression evaluation, then the expression
that caused it to be evaluated (since subexpressions are always
lazily-evaluated) also finishes with an error. Evaluation for that
subexpression is not attempted again during the same validation; if any other

> expressions attempt to call a subexpression that failed with an error, they

Reviewer: s/call/evaluate the variable ?

Author: Whoops, fixed
